Name: Kanchan Annasaheb Nikam
company: CODTECH IT SOLUTIONS 
ID:
Domains:Embedded system
Durations: November to December

Overview of project 
Project : HOME AUTOMATION SYSTEMWITH RASPBERRY PI
To create home automation system using a rasberry pi. control applications (like lights or fans) via a web interface or mobile app)
Creating a home automation system with a Raspberry Pi involves integrating hardware, software, and a control interface to manage appliances. Below are the detailed steps for implementing this project:


---

Materials Needed:

1. Raspberry Pi (any model with GPIO pins, e.g., Raspberry Pi 4, 3, or Zero W)


2. MicroSD card (16 GB or larger) with Raspberry Pi OS installed


3. Relays (to control high-power appliances like lights or fans)


4. Jumper wires


5. Breadboard (optional)


6. A Wi-Fi-enabled network


7. Appliances (e.g., light bulbs, fans, or other devices)


8. Power supply for Raspberry Pi


9. (Optional) USB or HDMI accessories for setup, or SSH for headless configuration




---

Overview of the System:

1. Raspberry Pi: Acts as the central controller.


2. Relay Module: Interfaces the Raspberry Pi with high-power appliances.


3. Control Interface: Web-based or mobile app for remote control.


4. Software: Python scripts for GPIO control, a web server (e.g., Flask or Node.js), and a database (optional).




---

Step 1: Set Up Raspberry Pi

1. Install Raspberry Pi OS using Raspberry Pi Imager.


2. Enable SSH and GPIO by navigating to Raspberry Pi Configuration.


3. Connect your Raspberry Pi to your Wi-Fi network.




---

Step 2: Hardware Setup

1. Connect the relay module to the Raspberry Pi GPIO pins:

VCC to Raspberry Pi 5V pin

GND to Raspberry Pi GND pin

IN1 to a GPIO pin (e.g., GPIO17)



2. Connect an appliance (e.g., a light bulb) to the relay's terminal:

One wire connects to the relay's NO (Normally Open) terminal.

The other connects to the appliance's power supply.




Warning: When working with high voltage, exercise caution and consult an expert if unsure.


---

Step 3: Install Required Software

1. Update your Raspberry Pi:

sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade


2. Install Python and Flask:

sudo apt install python3 python3-pip
pip3 install flask




---

Step 4: Write a Python Script

Create a Python script (app.py) to control the GPIO and serve the web interface.

from flask import Flask, render_template, request
import RPi.GPIO as GPIO

app = Flask(_name_)

# GPIO setup
GPIO.setmode(GPIO.BCM)
relay
